In this video we're going to show how
to turn at the deterministic model
into one that includes uncertainty.
We're going to do this
with a specific example.
Overbooking is a common practice
in the airline industry.
On every flight there is a fraction
of passengers that do not show up.
Anticipating this,
airlines overbook flights.
That is they sell more tickets
than the capacity of the aircraft,
hoping that the right number of customers
will show up and the plane will fly full.
Overbooking increases
the probability of a full flight,
maximizing revenue for the airline.
But if overbooking causes
passengers to be bumped,
there is a cost to the airline in
both travel vouchers and good will.
This of course reduces revenue.
The secret to overbooking is
finding that magical number
of extra reservations to avoid both
empty seats and bumped flyers.
If every passenger that would miss
a flight for any reason at all will have
to buy another ticket then empty seats
would not represent a loss of revenue.
However, this is not how things work.
Business travelers often pay higher
fares for refundable tickets.
These travelers need flexibility of
changing plans at the last minute and
the airline is happy to provide
this service for a price.
But even travelers flying on
non-refundable tickets could miss a flight
and be transferred to a later flight for
a fee or no fee at all.
Without overbooking the seats
of the no shows would be empty.
The loss of revenue of an empty
seat typically exceeds
the actual cost of compensating
a bumped passenger.
But angering people is not good for
business, and this is why
the overbooking models include cost of
not only what the passenger receives,
such as flight voucher, but
also an estimate of loss of goodwill.
The problem of setting an overbooking
limit on a flight is complex.
Airline analysts use models that consider
historical data, the mix of refundable and
non-refundable tickets, and
the different airfare classes and levels.
They even consider location
since a flight leaving Las Vegas
might have more no shows
than one leaving Detroit.
We're going to use a simplified version
of this problem to show how simulation is
used to deal with the uncertainty
of passenger behavior and
delays in flight schedules.
We're going to assume that we have been
charged with the task of establishing
an overbooking limit for
a particular flight of a discount airline.
The airline sells non-refundable
tickets only, but passengers that miss
the flight can transfer to
another flight for a fee of $60.
The flight uses an Airbus
319 with 134 seats.
Historically, the average demand for
this flight has been 150 passengers and
the show up rate has been 92%.
The price for the ticket is $314,
and we have considered
that each passenger that is
bumped cost the airline $400.
With this data, we will build a model to
calculate net revenue for this flight.
Before modeling this problem on
a spreadsheet, it is useful to understand
the logic of how the overbooking limit
interacts with the no-show rate.
This graphical representation
of the model shows that
everything starts in the yellow
box with the decision to overbook.
The overbooking limit is added
to the capacity of the aircraft
to calculate the booking capacity.
The number of passengers actually
booked is the minimum between
the booking capacity and
the actually demand.
This simply means that we cannot book
more passengers than the demand and
we're not allowed to book more
passengers than the booking capacity.
For various reasons some booked
passengers do not show up, but
most of them do and are ready to board.
If the number of passengers
that are ready to board exceeds
the capacity of the aircraft, then we have
to bump some passengers to a later flight.
Now you can the connection
between an overbooking limit and
the number of bumped passengers.
Know that this connection
is not direct and
other factors such as actual demand and
no-show rates play an important role.
Now, let's create
the spreadsheet model for this.
Locate and open the Excel file titled,
Flight Overbooking Simulation.
The workbook has two spreadsheets.
Let's start with the Overbooking Model.
The top part of the spreadsheet contains
the data, which includes the average
demand, the percentage of ticketed
passengers that actually show up for
the flight, the capacity of the aircraft,
the ticket price,
the transfer fee that no-shows must
pay to take another flight and
the cost to the airline for
every bumped passenger.
We use these values in the model that
estimates the number of bumped passengers
and the net revenue.
The model has one input,
two assumptions and two outputs.
The input in the light gold
cell is the overbooking limit.
The assumptions are in the green cells.
One is the actual demand and
the other is the number of passengers
that show up and are ready to board.
The outputs,
in the pale orange cells, are the number
of bumped passengers and the net revenue.
When the overbooking limit is set at 0 and
the demand is assumed to be 154
passengers, the model predicts
a net revenue of $42,732.
Naturally, there are no bumped passengers.
Therefore, the overbooking cost is 0.
We can see that the model also predicts
that there will be 11 no shows.
This means that in order to
increase the net revenue,
we could increase the overbooking
limit to at least 11 passengers.
If we do that, the estimated net
revenue increases to $46,250.
Note that the number
of no shows is now 12.
So we can increase the overbooking limit
to 12 to match the number of no shows.
The revenue is now $46,564.
Considering the assumptions that
the actual demand is 154 passengers and
that the show up rate is 92%, an
overbooking of 12 maximizes net revenue.
The model provides good insights.
First of all, overbooking has
the potential for increasing revenue.
However, the model does not take
advantage of additional historical data
that is available for
this particular flight.
We're only using average values for
historical records.
Let's assume that using historical
data we conclude that the demand for
this flight follows a Poisson distribution
with an average of 150 passengers.
Let's also assume that through
a statistical analysis
of the number of booked
passengers who show up,
we discover that it follows a binomial
distribution with a success rate of 0.92.
According to this distribution,
there is an 85% chance that more than
134 passengers will show up at the gate.
With this additional information
we can create a simulation model
that is based on the deterministic
model that we just built.
This is what we call adding
uncertainty to a spreadsheet model.
Let's take a look at
the model with uncertainty.
Click on the spreadsheet
named Overbooking Simulation.
The green cells contain functions
from the Analytic Solver Platform,
which we will refer to as ASP.
If you don't have the ASP loaded on Excel,
watch the video title
Introduction to the Analytic Solver
Platform first and then comeback here.
The actual demand is now a random number
that follows a Poisson distribution.
The number of passengers ready to
board is also a random number that
follows a binomial distribution.
All Analytic Solver Platform
functions start with the letters PSI.
If we click on the play button,
we can see that the net revenue changes.
We can also press on the F9 key to
recalculate the spreadsheet and
we will see that certain cells change
values and the net revenue changes.
Each time we do this the software runs
the number of trials as specified in
the tools section of the ribbon.
I have mine set to 10,000 trials.
Note that because this is assimilation
with an overbooking limit of 12,
the number of bumped
passengers is not always 0.
In this video we have used
a flight overbooking example
to show how to turn a deterministic
model into a simulation model.
We have learned how to add
uncertainty using the simulation
functions in the Analytic Solver Platform.
In the next video we will learn
how to collect simulation data and
how to use this output to answer relevant
questions and gain useful insights.